[RADIO CHATTER]
>> The Yup'ik elders, they're
the Southern Eskimo in Alaska,
they call this the
reverse society,
or the inside-out society.
They say, with legitimacy,
we reversed all the laws
for living.
We used to teach how
to live, and now we
teach how to make a living.
We used to honor
the elders, and now
we honor youth and being young.
The heart used to tell
the mind what to do,
and now the mind tells
the heart what to do.
We live in a society
that's totally in the head.
Before, the brain
would serve as an agent
to fulfill that comes from
the heart, and most people
now how to listen to the heart.
And you can't tell if it's a
heart or your mind talking.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
The real human being
lives from the heart.
The heart is the only
thing that is present.
With the brain and what
goes through the mind
is never present.
It's always in the past or in
the future, but it's never now.
[RHYTHMIC MUSIC]
>> With the Industrial Age,
when we separated living
your purpose versus
making a living,
it tore up the foundation
of the community,
which started to encourage
a massive exodus away from
community into places
where they have no roots.
And as a result, now,
we no longer even
talk about purpose, we
just talk about survival,
just struggling
to make ends meet.
In the old days, in
England, you know,
people were made to think
that if they got an education,
they're going to be
working for the king.
Well, a decade ago
or so, they realized
that the kingdom is not
going to be there for them.
And so it's like this
big awakening that--
what?
You know, I've been
bred to think that I
am going to be this person.
Now, who am if I don't have
the king to back me up?
And so our mind gets
trained to become fixated.
So in a way, yes,
we are creating
a prison where those thoughts
regulate how we behave.
But what if we start
to question that,
and we start to look at
things in a different way?
Then there is going to be
an earthquake, because all
of a sudden, you realize
that those things you
took for granted actually
are not what they are.
[THUNDER]
>> In this day and age, it's
very important to understand
that this culture called
modernity is at the brink
of collapse.
Part of the healing
that it needs
require looking into the
past, to collect those pieces
of technology, ways and means.
They used to be very
helpful to community
in sustaining themselves so that
eventually these methods can
work at rescuing people
from the throes of modernity
and restoring the sense of
connection in such a way
that other values
can come to pass,
the value of family of community
and of tribe as we know.
One of the first steps--
and I say that because there
are many steps among them.
Some of the first will
consist in recognizing
that there is a problem,
acknowledging, not
superficially,
not pretentiously,
but deeply that
there is a problem,
and the problem really has to do
with a split of community that
translates into this
rugged individualism, which
is adjacent pathology of
isolation, longing to belong
but not being able
to fulfill that.
Once the recognition of the
problem has been verified,
the other step will consist in
raising the issue as to what
has led us to this point,
and when the question
is raised in this fashion,
we will notice that
among the fundamental things
that have eventually translated
into this state of
separation, of isolation,
and so on and so forth is a
disconnection from the Earth,
the disconnection from
nature, and the disconnection
from the basic elemental thing.
They used to sustain a
group of people together.
What is it about the Earth
that we need to reconnect to--
is first of all to honor
the mythological dimension
of the Earth, the Earth as a
home, the Earth as a mother,
and the Earth as a nurturer.
We all know that regardless
of our technological
sophistication, we have now
been able to bring resources
from out of this planet.
So at least, we
have to recognize
that the Earth is a
generous nurturer, who
is providing everything we
human need in order to survive.
And therefore, what have
we done to show gratitude
toward the Earth?
What have we done to show
that we recognize the Earth
as an element that is so
important for our life
and our wellness that
we cannot do without?
If we begin warring in
this fashion, eventually,
the Earth, herself, will start
whispering something to us.
We will know that
because we will
start to become more conscious
and more aware of the work
that we do every day on
the body of Mother Earth.
This awareness
will soon translate
into an awareness of the
importance of each other.
The importance of
the other in my life
is the beginning of the
restoration of a consciousness
that is community oriented.
>> The others have
said that we are lost,
that we lost our connection,
our relationship to creation
and to the creator of all,
and the only way that we can
restore that or regain that is
to step into the myth of that
most sacred relationship.
And the disease for us right
now is, rather than remembering,
it's dismembering.
It takes apart the whole of
the world that we see here
and reducing it to a commodity.
When we reduce
things to a commodity
or to a commercial
enterprise, we're
not looking at it in
the context of what
God has asked us to
look at it, and that it
is a sacred and a vital
part of our relationship,
our role in this life.
It's living out in
a sacred manner.
And when we're able to commodify
things, then we take the spirit
and take the true
value out of that.
We have to restore that by
putting that back in place,
where its proper role
is that it's a teacher.
The cedar tree's a teacher.
The salmon's a teacher.
And it's also a part
of our sustenance.
It's a relationship
with that elk
and the relationship
with that eagle
and the relationship with that
cedar tree and that salmon.
We need to be reminded that
that's a sacred relationship,
that it's given its
life voluntarily
so that we can carry on ours.
And until we understand
that, truly understand that,
are we going to
always be bumping
into this question
about sustainable
living because it's really
a sacred relationship.
We need to constantly
be aware of that
in all of our decisions.
That would be an
interesting conversation
to have with those who
have lost their way.
How do we carry that
conversation forward
to have it make sense
to them once again?
Because in their
memory, they lived
in that way for
thousands of years
before this modern day came.
And so we need to tap into that.
And that memory is
going to wake them up.
And then we can start
working and really talking
about sustainable living.
It's a way of looking at life.
God created us with
the ability to choose.
We have to take that
responsibility more seriously.
We have to do what the Mohawk
Nation, Senecas over what
is now New York.
What they have
said is when we're
in the midst of
any deliberation,
we must take the
seventh generation
that's coming toward
us into consideration
before we make that decision.
That's a way to look
at these decisions
that we're making
right now today
that are affecting the great,
great, great grandchildren that
are yet to come.
We're such a throwaway society.
We have to be able to understand
that what we do to the Earth,
we do to ourselves.
What we do to ourselves,
we do to the Earth,
that there is no
separation there.
We're really linked together.
We have to realize that.
And we have to weigh it out.
The only way that we can
truly make these changes that
are necessary is when we
realize that all of creation
is connected together
and that it's here.
It can help us.
Or it can expedite our
demise, one of the two.
And right now we're not
making the wise choices.
We're down this steep slope.
And we need to turn that
thought process around.
We need to remind ourselves that
we're related to all of this.
It is here.
And it is crying out.
It's crying for us
to change our ways.
We have to be able to
feel that in our hearts
and hear those
cries and to realize
that every decision
that we make is either
going to be of benefit
to the Mother Earth
or it's going to be
to the demise of us
as human population
on this Earth.
The Earth will stay here.
Our mother will stay here.
We will, if we continue
to make bad choices,
won't be here much longer.
And we have to realize that.
I believe that we're
at the threshold
of this beautiful awakening
and that the awakening
is going to turn our hearts
and minds around to realize
that God has given us so much.
And now it's time for us to live
up to our end of the agreement
to say that we are the ones that
are responsible to make sure
that the water is pure, to
make sure that the air is pure,
to make sure that Mother Earth
is not wounded anymore, to make
sure that the fires
are sacred once again,
and that they produce light
and that they produce warmth.
And they produce love.
And they produce wisdom.
That's where we need to
go with this conversation.
>> The matrix that we are in
now is this old consciousness,
this current level
of consciousness.
And it really is a
matrix in the sense
that everything that
we see is not real.
Everything is an illusion.
And everything is based on lies.
We'd say, well, you're
saying a lot of absolutes.
But it's absolutely true.
The matrix makes us believe
we're living in a world that
is made by the human beings.
But it's not.
It's made from a
disconnected consciousness.
And so everything
that it creates
is equally disconnected.
If we want a world in which
everything is connected,
then we've got to
connect ourselves first.
Then we can escape this matrix.
Let's take a rubber
glove and blow it up.
[BLOWING NOISE] And
these fingers stick up.
In this analogy, these
fingers think they're human.
But they're only one breath.
That's who we really are.
That is the matrix,
this fact that we
think we're human beings.
But, in fact, we're spirit
in human experience.
>> These days not many
people are brought up with
consciousness about how me
drinking this glass of water is
going to impact you or
her or other people.
The consciousness
that we're being told
is, I need this glass of water.
Therefore, I'm
going to drink it.
It doesn't matter what happened
to the rest of the people.
And so people have gotten to a
place where they don't really
want change.
Who wants to change when
you don't have to change?
Staying awake
means that you have
to work on your consciousness
on a constant basis.
And I think that is really why
we are struggling as a world
because we're too short memory
when it comes to working
on our consciousness.
People are very
easy to go to sleep.
And it's because
we have accustomed
people to entertainment,
constantly entertaining them
away from those things
that are very important.
>> Consciousness changes
the moment we begin to pay
attention to the fundamental
elements that have contributed
to sustaining and maintaining
our lives here on this planet.
Recognition of this is
indeed a radical act
of consciousness
upgrade that will
begin to itemize all the
problems that we have worked
hard at creating
and, by doing so,
intensify our concern with
respect to our redemption.
Leading to the question, what
do we do to redeem ourselves?
We've gone so far.
Are we still redeemable.
When we get concerned
down to this depth,
we begin to realize that
all life in this planet
deserve the same
respect and that
were no better than
the other lives
that Mother Earth is tending to.
The animal, the
plants, all of that
are being given vitality
by Mother Earth.
And we are no different.
By the time we get to
this level of recognition,
I would say we are so
conscious that we might
say that we have reawakened our
Indigenous self, because it is
a loss of that
Indigenous part of us
that has led to this sort
of all out catastrophe.
And it has meant
countless lives being
taken, countless destruction
being brought to the Earth,
to the point where the very way
that we live is unsustainable.
It cannot last.
It's as if we have agreed
that we are going to head out
to an all out
apocalypse, as if we know
that the Titanic is sinking.
And we are working hard to make
it sink anyway, not to change.
And so by recognizing this,
our consciousness will kick in
and will make us first
take responsibility.
And that's what is going
to lead to the changes that
are needed like yesterday.
>> When we go back to the
differentiation between making
a living and living a purpose,
if you don't want people to be
worried about what
they're doing,
you don't want to initiate them.
Because if you
initiate them, you
know you're going to
ignite something then
that will awaken that gift.
So by not initiating,
you leave a door
that is wide as possible for you
to have room for manipulation
there.
But now, life being
life, whether you get
initiated by a group of
elders, by a village,
by a tribe, life itself
will initiate you.
And the difference is maybe
that when you get self-initiated
or when life chooses
to initiate you,
you don't have a village
to welcome you back to say,
right on.
Now you got it, you got it.
So now deliver.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
And so we do get initiated.
But we don't have the validation
and the cheering of a community
to say, you did it.
And so that's why a lot of us
get into loops of initiation
because our psyche is trying to
grasp with what just happened
and how we feel.
And because there is silence
around what is happening,
we basically go in,
maybe it's not it.
Maybe we didn't get initiated.
So let me create another
circumstance that you're
going to get initiated.
A lot of young people
are getting initiated.
And even some adults who said
they've never been initiated,
something happened.
So the modern day initiation
is not necessarily
going to look like an
Indigenous initiation.
But divorce will be
a big initiation.
Losing a parent is an
initiation and so on and so on.
So it looks different.
But those things will
definitely get you
to a place of initiation.
Let's take, for instance, war
as an initiation and a lot
of veterans coming back
without any kind of welcoming
and sometimes without any
kind of acknowledgment.
And so the key is
acknowledgment and welcoming.
So when a veteran has
returned and has not had that,
it's very hard for them to
reintegrate society and be
a, quote unquote,
"normal functioning
person" within society.
And so what we need
is a lot of welcoming
because when you don't have
that initial welcoming,
your system goes
into shutdown mode
because you don't want to feel
the pain of not being welcome.
And so as a result,
one welcoming
is not going to do it anymore.
You need several
welcoming until that door
has made soft enough
that it can open again
to let those people in
to actually welcome you.
And so by us being
able to welcome them,
we're not only validating
their experience.
But we're also saying,
hey, we notice.
We have bear witness to this.
You didn't go through
this for nothing.
There is a reason
why you went for it.
We went through it.
Yeah.
>> The origin of this mentality
of the loss of connection
and so forth, it really has
to do with, let's just say,
a small group of power hungry
that have made a deal with--
let's just call it the devil--
and whose soul purpose is
to go out there, seek out,
and destroy anything
that is not serving
the greed that have been
inoculated into them,
his irrelevance.
And whether this is something
that secret societies are
contributing to sustaining,
knowing that in the end
is going to mean destruction
of a massive proportion.
What is predominant is
that the source of this
has to do with the
human losing respect,
losing respect for
the Earth simply
because the immediacy of
exploitation and the benefit
reaped from that
as men that they
can get instant gratification
even if it means down the road
that destruction happened.
A person who ends up
thinking like this
has no respect for
himself or herself,
has no respect for the
Earth, and has no respect
for continuity, the kind
that means that we live now
in such a way that would
pave the way for others
down the road to find a
safe, sane place to grow.
This is why this energy has
taken the time to expand
and to grow to the point where
it has become so gigantic that
it looks like it
cannot be stopped.
How?
Because we have here all kinds
of greedy expression associated
with materialism that is so
rooted on a desire to expand
that in the end it's
self-diagnosed as insatiable
when you cannot be satiated.
It means that you
have a deep problem.
And that problem is
likely to become epidemic
and to infect others.
At this juncture, I'm sure
that there is knowledge
of the depth of the problem.
It's just that sometimes
the problem we create
can be so big that
we become completely
unable to do anything about it.
So we go forward knowing
that we're going to die.
And this is not a
very good picture.
Sometimes you've got to stop
and be willing to do so,
knowing that this is a
dignifying position to take.
So in order for
community to be restored,
there is nothing to reinvent.
There's a
discontinuation of a lot
of things that need to happen.
We got to stop doing
certain things.
We've got to stop
exploiting the Earth,
polluting her,
disrespecting her.
And as we do that, we're going
to recognize that, indeed, when
we disrespect the Earth,
we disrespect the mother,
we disrespect the feminine.
And in the end, we
disrespect ourselves.
This becomes, therefore, a
shameful act of such depth
that the desacralization
of the Earth
take away from us
the core spirit that
is meant to give us an
experience of this presence
and this dimension as
something elegant, dignifying,
and joyful.
This is the reason
why at this juncture
the Indigenous wisdom
is more than ever needed
because it has taken this wisdom
to sustain continuity long
enough for modernity to occur.
And, yes, the Earth in her
infinite love and bounty
has the capacity to
forgive and to give us
the kind of shelter that
is deserving of people
who know how to show respect.
And, therefore,
it's just a matter
of recognizing that we have
defaulted in a lot of things
and to come down on our knees,
showing more humility than ever
in order to be granted
this type of forgiveness.
It is consciousness
and a radical act
of strength to rise from the
ashes of self-destruction
and destruction of
this Earth in order
to embrace the kind
of dispensation that
is respectful of all
lives and is respectful,
more importantly, of the Earth.
>> I know it seems
difficult. But, really,
it's one small step at a time.
First, we work on
our belief system.
And we let go of those things
that we think that we know.
And we allow ourselves
to pray, to meditate,
and to walk in the midst
of the present moment.
When the ancestors see that you
are searching for that truth
inside, they will
send you messages.
They will let you know that
you're on the right track,
basically.
And there'll be small
steps along the way
being able to go
up to the mountains
and spend their
weekend in silence
and walking through
the forest, being
able to listen to
the birds, and being
the wind, as it
moves through the ancient
forests, the old growth
forests.
Being able to take
the time to set down
those things that have
been a distraction to us,
just set them down.
Then say I want to just
focus on one thing.
And that is how do I
gain that inner peace?
How do I gain that insight
into who I really am.
And how to relate to this world
that is in front of me, that
is before me?
There's a way for us
to take these steps.
Sometimes, if we're
in the inner cities,
and we hear the
sirens blowing, and we
hear all these
different noises, they
can break up those moments
of peace that we have.
There's ways to go deeper
into this world of prayer
and meditation that will block
out all of the realities that
were faced, even in the inner
city that takes discipline.
And it takes a belief
that we have the ability
to move beyond the
existing reality.
Small steps along the way,
light a candle, offer a prayer,
sit in silence.
Be at peace.
Find a way to come to
terms with yourself,
all those things that
are distractions to us,
whether it's paying
the light bill,
or whether it's the cost
of gas, or whether it's
something at work, or whether
it's a relationship, set it
all down.
And say, I'm here for
this moment in time
to come to a deeper
understanding of who am I
and how do I relate
to this reality here.
Small steps, it'll take time.
But it's about belief
systems about who you are
and where you want
to be in the future.
Those things that are
coming toward you.
You can look into that.
What the others told me, when
I started having these dreams,
is that you could
interact with your dreams.
And sometimes, if
something's not going right,
then, you can interact with
it and change that reality
with your own mind.
Now that's the power
of belief right there.
That's where we can go with
our life, with our time,
as long as we don't get bogged
down in this modern society,
as long as we don't get
bogged down in that,
and think that that's the
best it's ever going to be.
It's right here, right now.
That's really sad
to think about.
This work that's
coming toward us
it's going to show us so much
of what we need to know, so much
of how to conduct ourselves.
So much of how to be in
relation to God's creation.
Even though there seems to
be quite a bit of work ahead
of us, but my sense is what
the elders have passed on
through the times
was that love is
going to be the antidote
to all of these things
that we find ourselves
in the midst of.
As long as we can carry
the capacity of love,
and we walk within the integrity
of what God intended to us,
others will see that.
And they all want to
share in that experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It began, obviously, in
Europe when the world had
slipped into
masculine imbalance.
That was something like
4,000 to 6,000 years ago.
The pendulum had swung to
masculine imbalance, which
is a time we're still in now.
The elders say,
for the first time,
since the beginning of
time, we have an opportunity
to stop this pendulum
swinging back and forth
between masculine, and
feminine, and balance.
And stop it in the center.
In order to do that, we have
to restore the feminine back
to its original place.
One is that its sacred.
Feminine is sacred.
Two, that it is about love,
and nurturing, and caring for,
and receiving all
these aspects that are
the qualities of the feminine.
These are aspects that
are not honored today.
We need to bring them back.
The first thing we
need to bring back
is restoring the feminine back
to its place of sacred honor.
And then women will be
restored to their place
as original healers during
this process, during this time.
For example, women would
now engage in ceremonies.
The reason that originally
women were considered sacred
and are sacred is that,
within their body,
is a thing they
call the womb, which
is really a field of energy.
It's simply a physical function.
It's a field of energy that
is identical to the field
of energy at the
center of the universe.
And it's from that place, at
the center of the universe,
that we get creativity.
And we get creation.
And with that is contained
in the woman's body.
Well, through ceremony,
women can take that energy
and put it out into a
physical realm in this world.
And from that point, it becomes
a container, a container
to produce something
totally new.
Until that's done, nothing
new is going to be created.
It's going to be impossible
without the women to do that.
And so anything that's
being produced without that,
anything, I don't
care what it is,
technology, new economics,
new agricultural systems, none
of it is going to solve
the problems that we're
facing today.
They will add to the
problems eventually,
over time because that's created
from the same consciousness
that created the problems,
in the first place.
To change that
consciousness, then, we
have to go to that
field to produce
anything that is
going to be genuinely
new that will last lifetimes.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
The elders teach or ask us
the question what are we
focusing on?
Are we focusing on that which
we're trying to move away from,
or that which we're
trying to move towards?
Because what we choose to
focus on becomes the reality.
For truth to focus on what
we're trying to move away from,
no matter how good you think it
is, let's say environmentalism.
And you're focused on
stopping coal or stopping
the development that's coming
through Canada, what you're
doing, even though
you're opposing it,
is actually adding to
the problem itself.
Because, over time,
what will happen
is that these things
become reality.
And we satisfied
ourselves or our egos
that we've done
what we could do.
We fought like hell,
and blah, blah, blah.
And then, in the end, we lose.
So the world that we want to
see, we should focus on that.
That's what the
elders are saying
because where we choose
to put our attention
is where we are
going to accomplish
that which we're seeking.
If we're trying to
fight from a paradigm
or react to something
that's happening,
we're going to feed that
thing for a long, long time,
for generations.
I've been advising, for
example, foundations
that fund indigenous people
to stop focusing on funding
things, to stop things,
to fight against things,
but focus on those things
that are looking towards what
world we want to see.
If we choose to
focus on the world
we want to see, without
reference to that past,
but the world we want to see,
then, that becomes the reality.
>> This might be a
stretch for some.
We realize that some of us
carry these gifts to enter
into relations of what today we
refer to as the future reality.
And some of us have the ability
to move into what we refer
to today as the past or
the history of our people,
have the ability to move.
And they can come right
back to this present moment.
So if it can happen
in this present moment
to go both directions,
how is it that we
can refer to it as the
past or the future,
if it's right here right now?
And it just takes the ability
for our mind to grasp that,
to hold on to that.
Our minds are so powerful, I
would say, so much under use
that we can change
our reality once we
see that there are very few
limitations to our work that's
in front of us.
As long as we use
the understanding
that the thing
that is guiding us
is the songs, and the dances,
and the ceremonies of our life,
the walk on this
Earth, that we're
gifted to us from the creator
from the beginning of time.
To me, when we're able to move
into that realm of spirit,
nothing else exists.
Nothing else needs to
exist, including time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the things that
we've done is disconnect from
our heart because of past
traumas of some kind.
I don't think there's a
soul on Earth that isn't--
have a legacy of trauma
in their lineage.
When vets came
back from Vietnam,
they came back by the thousands,
many of whom were depressed
and took to addictive drugs,
and all these kinds of things.
And the doctors couldn't
figure out what was wrong,
but they knew there
was something going on.
Then they put a name to it,
post-traumatic stress disorder,
PTSD.
We think about all
the wars that there
has been in human
history, thousands
of different kinds of wars.
In Europe, they had the
Crusades and the Inquisition,
where they killed
millions of women.
In the US, we've had
World War I, World War II,
Korean conflict, Vietnam
War, the Civil War.
The Civil War killed
700,000 Americans,
Mexican-American war.
You just go through
these, and you
know that the survivors
of these human tragedies
had to have been people
who wanted to separate
from their feelings.
This is what they
figured out with PTSD
with the Vietnam vets.
They didn't want to remember
or be reminded of the horrors
that they experienced
during that war.
And so it would take
to these behaviors.
And one of the first things
that happened, according
to our elders, when you
separate from your heart,
is that you take to addictive
behaviors, something
that is a poor attempt to try
to replace the heart itself.
They also said addictive
behaviors like a big stomach
wants to eat all the time,
but can never be filled.
That's where we found ourselves.
And those people became
parents, and they pass along
the behaviors of addiction
to their children.
Now we live in a society
that's based on addiction.
It's really horrific.
And so what we first
must do is come
to terms with our own
pains, our own shadows.
And actually, move
through them emotionally.
Get back in touch with
the way it makes us feel,
while you understand that you're
not attaching yourself to it.
You're just simply
experiencing the feeling
that occurred whenever something
happened to you as a child,
probably.
As children, were totally open.
It's easy to get
traumatized, in some way.
It could be a spanking.
It could be something worse.
It doesn't take much.
And so we have to go
to that place, where
we suffered the trauma, and
work through those traumas,
and let them go.
Just totally let them go.
And to do that, you have to
let go of judgment of yourself.
Just like you would have
compassion for a child,
you would have a
compassion for yourself.
And say, I did go through that.
And it was tough.
I did the best I could,
that kind of thing.
And so that's one
way of doing it.
Another way would be
going to ceremony,
healing ceremonies, where
the culture themselves
have ways to heal those
things that keep us
from being a real human being,
keeping us from being present.
Grieving ceremonies
would be one of them.
The Native Americans
and probably all people
have forgotten how to grieve.
So they don't grieve.
And when you don't grieve,
it's like a stagnant pool
that's inside of you that
just stagnates, and rots,
and eventually would kill you.
It's not healthy to hold
on to any of those things.
Guilt, shame,
remorse, anger, rage,
all that comes from the past.
Fear, which is projection
to the future, something
that hasn't happened yet,
you let go of these things,
until you get to the
point where you can just
be present in the moment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We take a look at this
reality that we find herself
in the midst of
this current day.
It's about perspective.
The perspective is those
things that are out there,
the tangible things
that are out there.
If we turn that
around and go inside,
then it becomes an
internal question.
And the internal
question is, where
is my place in this world?
Where is my place in this
beautiful part of the world.
And how do I deepen
my understanding,
not of the physical
nature of things,
but of the spiritual nature of
things, that are all around me?
I was sitting in a hotel
with a dear friend,
and she used the
table, as an example.
She said, tell me
what you see there?
And I looked at it.
And I knew that I was
going to answer it wrong.
So I just dove in.
I said, that's a coffee table.
And she says, before, it
wasn't a coffee table.
What was it?
It was a Walnut tree.
So before it was a
Walnut tree, was it?
She said it was a
spiritual element,
since that's where you need
to begin the conversation.
That it's really
about the spirit.
What the elders tell us is
that the spirit goes before us
wherever we are, if we're living
in relationship to the spirit
that exists within.
Like when I leave here,
I'll offer a prayer.
And ask my spirit to go
before me to clear the way,
so that I can make
it home safely.
In that relationship, we have
to bring that back to light,
again.
We have to use
that and understand
that as the essential
truth to us, rather
than it being an afterthought.
Or rather than being left
out of the conversation,
it should be the
focus in the catalyst
of our future conversations.
>> There were some
elders that I was with,
and we just had some time
together having a dinner.
And I said, I have just a
little bit of time left.
And I wanted to
ask you what would
be the most valuable
thing for us
to do, as far as our energy
and our work for the short time
remaining, both the elders
said work with the youth.
Work with the young.
They're the ones that are
going to change this reality.
We have to give them the tools,
and the knowledge, the wisdom
that comes from our relationship
to this culture, to the spirit,
and to the language
of our people,
and allow them to live
to breathe once again.
I asked an elder what was
the most devastating impact
that our foreigner, our
friends, our relatives who
came across the Atlantic,
what was it they
brought here to our land?
And what is the most
devastating feature of that?
He said that they brought
it out into our lives.
They brought out that
we had less confidence
that we were healers,
that we were teachers,
that we were visionaries, that
we were the people who could
work with the medicine plants
they brought down into our life
that we had a direct line or
connection with creator of all.
And so he suggested to me,
after making that statement.
And he says, your purpose
on this Earth right
now is to extract that
doubt from the conscience
of our people, to let
them know that they
are the healers, that they are
the teachers, that they are
the visionaries that can
see into the future, what
people refer to as the future.
Because absent of that doubt,
we have all the capacity
that God had intended for us.
And that applies to all
sectors of our society,
all sectors of our human
population here on Earth.
And it's really to
eradicate that doubt,
and to put it in its place
the truth about who we are,
and the purpose of us
being on this Earth today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Any person in
this day and age,
who is entertaining
this kind of thought,
the thought associated with new
consciousness needing to come
out, the thought associated
with community, with village,
that person is actually
a child of the Earth,
who was being hired by Mother
Earth to do the impossible
task.
That person is engaged in not
just raising consciousness,
but in doing some massive
janitorial work of cleaning
human consciousness from
all this garbage that
has wrapped itself around it.
So that it can go
all the way down
to that shiny piece
of indigenous core,
that would then take
on the job of restoring
the respect due to the Earth.
And so such a person must
see himself or herself,
as, therefore, a
sacred entity, who
is engaged in a priestly
activity for the redemption
of humanity before this Earth.
Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To Councilor, thank
you for this day.
Thank you for our lives.
Thank you for all
of our blessings.
And thank you for
gatherings of people
who come together to address
issues of the human being.
We thank you for the eagle
that teaches us that we, too,
can soar high and see far.
Thank you for the finned ones,
the salmon that teaches us
that we, too, can come home.
We thank you for the owl
that teaches us that we, too,
can see in the dark.
We thank you for these and all
your teachings that teaches us
how to be a real human being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]